So anyway, if we could begin. You just sort of
introduce yourself, and you don't need to talk
into the mic. It's real good. It picks up all kinds
of stuff. It picks up right there. OK, my name is
Bill Kendrick. I was raised in central part of
Texas, up near Burnett. I went to Southwest Texas
State in San Marcos. And after that, I got a job with
the Soil Conservation Service. What did you major
in? In agronomy. And when I worked for the Soil
Conservation Service, I was in the position of a
soil scientist. And we did... When was this? When
did you go to school? When did you graduate? This
was in the mid-60s, 65, 66. Oh, but I knew the deputy
director of the soil conservation service for a
very long time, Jeff Dykes, who, I don't know
whether you knew him or not, he was from
Washington, D.C. Old egg. No, I guess I knew him. I
was working up in... He retired maybe about the
time you joined. I was working up in Comanche.
county doing a progressive soil survey of that
county and it was in the late 60s i guess by that time
i'd been with the service about seven years that
they were getting to to formulate the woodlands
and put it together and the environmental
planners uh particularly when you talk about that
you think of ian mccard right that wrote the book
design with nature they wanted One of the things
that they needed was the soils information. And so
being the young progressive soil scientist, I
guess, up in Comanche County, the Soil
Conservation Service was looking for someone to
come to the woodlands, at that time we're talking
about 20,000 acres, and be a party leader to map out
the existing soils that occurred in the
woodlands. So as part of the environmental impact
statement and part of the original HUD HUD
application and part of that plan. So I got
selected to come down and it was kind of an unusual
agreement that the federal government could not
go and do work on private lands and do a survey that
had already been completed at a larger scale as
part of the Montgomery County soil survey. So what
they did, they kind of contracted us through the
local salt and water conservation district And we
in turn, through the district, we were able to work
in the woodlands. So we came in and spent about
almost a year. I guess I moved to Conroe then in
1972. And we spent about a year in the field mapping
out the different soil types and observing and
recording the different vegetation types that
was occurring on the soil.
After we finished the field work, at the same time
we were doing water percolation tests and we had
water table studies where we were doing some
little shallow wells and doing that. And we were
having visits and corresponding with McCarg and
his planners, working along with them at the same
time. Then we had to finish up the report after we
did the field work. And I was finishing that up and
ready to move on to something else, and I was
offered a job to go work with the Woodlands
Corporation to stay around and help them
interpret and understand. Who did it? Who offered
me the job. The person who was leading, hitting up
that part of the planning at the time was James
Beltman, or Jim Beltman. and he was kind of the
liaison between the corporation and mccard and
his people so he thought i should be part of the team
to stay around and do that so he offered me a job and
at the time it was a rough decision to give up my
security of working with the federal government
to come to work with the developer this was about
when this was in 19 i actually came to work in 1973.
okay You've been here a long time. I've been here a
long time. The Woodlands didn't open until 1974.
So
I came to work with them and immediately fell into
the
job of working with the planters and trying to
explain the different soil types and what we'd
expect from a development. They were concerned
about runoff and recharge and all those
percolation rate of soils and we did some of that.
then it was like well you know what am i going to do
now so i got involved in the in the tree
preservation aspect of the woodlands because of
that earlier experience of mapping out the
vegetation and having that knowledge of the
different kinds of trees and agronomy knowledge
so the concern and the challenge from mr mitchell
from the early days was to develop a new town and not
disturb the character of the forest which meant
that we were going to try to save every tree we
possibly could. We were not going to destroy what
we call the understory of the big trees, the canopy
trees with the overstory and everything
underneath was the understory. The brush. Where
you get your screen and where you get your
flowering plants like dogwoods and sassafras and
all that kind of thing. So that was... I think one of
the most significant, from the appearance of the
Woodlands today, I think that was a significant
decision. It was not going to be a park-like
environment where you go in and just leave the
mature trees and clear the understory. And based
on the premise that we were going to try to utilize
the natural forest as much as we could, so it's a lot
cheaper and it just makes more sense to to save what
you have, groom and prune and work with that and
replace with native plant material as opposed to
cut everything down and bring in something
completely foreign and plastic looking and plant
that. So, you know, it's working with the existing
plant. So I was given the job of the tree keeper and
so I ended up working with the individual builders
that came to the Woodlands and we actually went out
and required the builders to outline the
footprint, whether it was a single family or
whether it was a commercial structure, to outline
the footprint. If they were going to clear, then
we... They'd actually stake it out? Stake out the
footprint and the driveway and with a continuous
ribbon all the way around and then we would either
approve or disapprove an issue of clearing permit
if everything was properly marked out. And we
would make decisions at that time, can we shift the
house to the front or to the rear, and can we move
things over to save a few trees. So we were
successful in saving a lot of trees simply because
of offsets in the house that maybe they didn't take
advantage of, or maybe flipping and putting the
driveway on the other side and doing those kinds of
things. and but once we said okay now you can clear
so they go in and they get so bad it's it's always
been rewarded for being as as fast and as reckless
as you can the fact you clear the better you are the
dozer operator the dozer operator so uh he just
started falling trees and they were going outside
the ribbon and everywhere so we had a real
education process with all the subcontractors in
the woodlands as to how we wanted them to try to
protect the forest it was they were just not
accustomed to doing anything that drastic but
tedious as far as keeping let me explore that just a
little bit um manifestly what you're talking
about is something well in fact what you're saying
is this was not a normal way of doing business.
Usually when a builder goes in, it's his
convenience to serve first in terms of building a
home, because that lowers his costs, that he can do
it more efficiently. Do strip clearing and build a
pad. And from here's point of view, even more
effectively, really, than what you're
suggesting. So that education process had to be
fairly formable, I would think. Could you explain
a little bit about one how that education process
developed, the role you played in it, to how
successful it was. Was there a builder fallout?
Were there some builders that said, I ain't going
to do this, and wandered off? Were there times
when, in fact,
you mentioned that you gave them approval. What
happened when they didn't get approval? Builders
sometimes work on a very marginal kind of profit.
Delays, what have you, could seriously disrupt or
affect their success? How did you deal with those
kinds of things? I guess the most beneficial two we
had to work with was as the different sections were
developed. They were described and they were so
under covenant that the the development criteria
for that section spelled out that the vegetation
would be preserved. It was kind of a binding
agreement with them. We had a lot of problems with
the builders who were coming out of Houston in the
1960s and coming out here and they'd never done
things like this before. They didn't like the
delays. They didn't like putting up the fencing.
We had a lot of real heated arguments with some of
the builders to the point where, you know, they
just almost want to fight. They'd get so mad at you.
And we ended up kind of having a, taken back through
DSC. They had a committee called DSC, which was
Development Standards Committee. Yeah. That
approved the single family plans and that aspect.
And there were many meetings where we would, it had
the support of management, what we were trying to
do. And we would have meetings where we would
present, maybe I would put together a slide show
and those kind of things, and we would meet and
present it to the builders. We would not only
present it to the builders, but we'd present it to
their people that they used as landscape. You
know, we'd invite all of the landscape people and
all of the builders and all of the cleanup men,
which probably had more decision than any of us in
what it actually looked like in the end. actually
doing the cleanup and putting down the saw and
doing the grading. You know, the lowest paid
person on the staff was the one that was making the
final decision as to the survival of my little
wishes, the brush. But it was that kind of, those
kind of meetings, and again, it had support of Mr.
Mitchell on down, and that was what the Williams
was going to do like, you know. And it was basically
just, you know, either build like we want you to
build or go somewhere else, you know. It was kind of
a... the builders were, we weren't just selling
lots to everyone, you know, it was kind of a select
group of people that were here. They had to have a
track record proving, you know, they built a good
house and those kind of things. So it was a good
situation to be in. I felt like we always had the
upper hand and had control. If they over cleared,
then we tried to force them to replant. And it was a
lot of have so far involved when you didn't abide by
the rules we required after clearing after you got
to that point then you had all the subcontractors
that want to go through the woods and tear up the
forest so we found out we can't have that because
we're not going to have anything so we required
them to put up in the early days in this training
process this is like in the 70s or not mid 70s this is
some of the first homes we built down in all across
some settler's corner town halls where the first
models of the woodlands were that I'm thinking
about. We required them to put up fencing right
inside that envelope. And they didn't want to do
that. In some cases we actually went in and put up
the fence ourselves to help protect the
vegetation of the first models that we built to
make the point that we were trying to get across.
And We were successful in doing that. And once,
after they built the homes there and they got rid of
the landscape, we insisted, too, on approval of
the landscape plan so that they would maintain the
natural character again, use, you know,
indigenous plants or use native plants that would
fit in and texture and blend in with the existing
mature trees that were there. So, you know, when
the models opened, we were all very proud of the way
they looked. literally just tucked into the woods
at the end of a cul-de-sac and it was very popular a
lot of people really liked that concept but there
were still those in the sales force and they were
skeptical about what it would really working on
you know the place looked like it's not being
maintained it looks like we need to mow along with
the streets and anytime the sales were down they
always blamed it on signage and landscape you know
that was why we were not selling homes I mean first
impressions. First impression that you get when
you come into the Woodlands. But Mr. Mitchell was
very persistent about that was what the Woodlands
was going to be like and we were going to save the
forest and so the problem you had then was once you
sell that home to someone he wants to come in and
because of that nature and that natural instinct
to get out and and clear his block of land and
develop the way he's always seen it with St.
Augustine grass and curb appeal to my house. The
first weekend is there, he takes his saw, his
machete, and he comes down and he wants to chop up
everything that we've been beating the builders
over the head about for five, six months to save. He
clears it out the first weekend and puts it on the
curb and gets someone to haul it off the next week.
So we thought, how do we overcome that one? We
actually went around in the early days and visited
with the residents. We'd have native landscape
seminars for all the residents of the woodlands.
In the early days we had a wildflower conference, I
think we called it, where we would put people on bus
tours and drive them around. and identify
wildflowers to build that kind of interest that
you had. And it was, you know, those that were very,
the little ladies in tennis shoes and the very
ecology-minded people were the easiest ones to
sell. But those that had prior homes and lived in a
more suburban area were the most difficult to
sell. And, you know, our theory was that if you
could just get someone to, you know, to wait a
season before you chop anything down and be inside
your glass home and look out like we're looking out
now into this area and watch it change through the
seasons and watch the flowering of the dogwoods
and the berries, the beauty berries and all those
things develop. Then you develop that
appreciation for it. And we always insisted
everyone go through the information center,
which is a multimedia presentation on that one.
And we developed a nature trail by the information
center also and we had a brochure that went along
with the trail and it was open to all the residents
and it explained our concept for development and
how important it was to keep it foraged and how But,
you know, so many trees in front of your house
increase the value 27%, you know, a lot of value.
And how important it was to the environment and to
the birds and the wildlife and all that. And let
them begin to identify the trees and there was a
posted number and it told you the common and
botanical name. And just try to instill that sense
of real feeling that we had about how important it
was to development. Keep that character. Yeah, I
appreciate it. Do you know...
I forgot how to ask this question.
Playing devil's advocate, let's say I move here
from East Orange,
New Jersey. For whatever reasons, I buy... home or
buy a lot in the woodlands and build on it. And then
Bill Kendrick or somebody comes and tells me about
how I should be landscaping it.
With certain kinds of personalities, there might
be some resistance to anyone telling me what to do
with my land. You know what I'm saying? Exactly.
How many, I guess, of the people you talked to were,
to borrow a religious phrase, converted to Mr.
Mitchell's vision versus those who said, I ain't
going to do it, versus those who said, we moved and
then went somewhere else. Do you understand what
I'm saying? How successful, I guess I'm trying to
ask, was that? a combination of educational slash
propagandizing, and I mean that in a positive
sense, effort. Do you have any feel for that at all?
Well, I think the best way to answer the question,
if you could, the village of Grover's Mill was the
first one we did. And if you could drive back
through Grover's Mill in sections one, two,
three, four, five, six, and seven, you know, those
are the first ones. You can't see the houses where
the trees. I mean, it's literally very
successful. There was always a few. And that's
true in any situation. But I'd say 90% successful.
To me, success meant if you drove down the street
There was always a native look to the landscaping.
The mature trees were there, there was a certain
amount of understory. I consider we were
successful if we had a natural block of forest
opposite side of the driveway that was not
completely destroyed and cleared out and
installed to St. Augustine grass.
They enjoyed, I think, the privacy that you get
from leaving it in the backyard so you don't see
your neighbor's swing set, so you don't see a row of
houses. It's kind of that little secluded bit of
privacy that you get. What you have to remember,
things were a little bit slow in those days in 74.
They weren't a little bit slow. They were real
slow. It's almost like you built a new town but no
one came. So you had the opportunity to work.
one-on-one with a homeowner, art builder, and
you're not in the fast pace that you're in today. So
you're able to spend more time with them and then do
a better job of that conversion experience that
we're talking about. Does that still continue
today? Are you still doing this in 1991? It's still
just as important to Mr. Mitchell and management
as it's ever been. I understand that, but how is it
accomplished? Today it's, we have a, we don't go
door to door and try to talk to new homeowners. The
builder still gets beat over the head just as hard
as he ever did about doing his part. We have a, at the
information center, they hand out a residential
guide to landscaping in the woodlands, something
we developed to show them how to. May I have this?
Yes. Thank you. How to try to save the, try to save
the forest.
It's handed out there. There's all kinds of
information that they get when they move to the
Woodlands. It's like the welcome wagon or the
newcomer approach to it. It's included in that.
There's still slideshows and presentations to
landscapers and builders today. And I think
probably more than anything, it's probably
enforced just the feeling that you get when you
drive into the Woodlands by the people.
The best effort is probably made by the people that
live here now. Tim probably told you. I sensed
that, yeah. I don't know, I seem like it's, I don't
remember the number, at least 25 or 30% probably of
the new home sales or referrals from people living
here now. And it's just a pride that the community
has. I mean, you know, if somebody really get on
your case now about tearing up trees, it's the
residents against the developer, you know. And
it's a good position to be in. Tim also mentioned
that just since 1985, over 50% of the builders have
packed it in and left. So I assume you're having a
continuing education program with those new
builders as well. Yes, it's always... From day
one, it's been a problem. Not just the builders,
but from the subcontractors. Those are drivers
that left, you know, or knew and came in. You had to
go through the same process again. My role has
changed. Now since I'm manager of grounds
maintenance, I'm not working with the builders or
the residents in that respect. You know, we're
concentrating on kind of out of that field that
we're talking about. that I wasn't doing at that
time. I'm doing something different. Well,
that's good. Let's shift gears. What are you doing
now? How does your role fit? How long have you been
doing this, manager of grounds maintenance? This
is about the fourth year. It's kind of my five years
now. Okay, okay. Was there a predecessor to you?
Was it a position created for you? Was there
someone who was... There was someone here, and he
retired. Oh, okay. So you inherited a... Well,
philosophy obviously has already existed, but
you inherited some procedures and activities.
What challenges, changes, like I said,
benchmarks have occurred in the last 10 years in
what is your job? I think one thing I didn't mention
Now we're involved in not working on individual
lots, but we're working on all the company-owned
properties, anything the company owns, and we
maintain it. We landscape it. We maintain all of
the street right-of-ways. And one of the
significant things we've been able to do there is
the utilization of the natural reforestation,
which simply says that If you've got a grass that
you're mowing there every day and a little pine
tree sticks its head up and you cut it off, it never
has an opportunity to grow back. So many areas that
we can, we go in and do a planting of native plant
material and let Mother Nature come back and heal
those scars. And our concept oversimplified is to
to hide the unsightly parts and accentuate all the
pluses and the beauty. And that's kind of our, and
using native plant material, you know, that's our
philosophy. I think one of the most popular things
we've done is the development of our Woodlands
Wildflower Program that we have. grown to the
point where this year we probably planted about
$20,000 worth of wildflower seeds. Probably one
of the biggest plantings that occurs anywhere in
the state of Texas. We bought over, planted about
2,000 pounds of bluebonnet seed, which is a lot of
bluebonnets. And what we've seen is that has
really grown in interest. And with Mr. Mitchell's
encouragement, We're not only doing that here in
the Woodlands, but we're trying to encourage
other people to do this. For instance, the Hardy
Toll Road, we've gone down and did some plantings
on the Hardy Toll Road. Your office is down there?
Right. From the Woodlands Corporation. They
provided the seed, and we actually go do the
planting for them. He asked us to go down to Rice
University, and we did some demonstration
plantings down there. pray to sow the seed and, you
know, they'll reap the benefits. On the Beltway 8,
for the Houston Lighting and Power, they provided
the seed and we went and did some plantings
underneath some of their power lines. There's a
test project. He believes that, you know, if we can
have other people do what we're doing, from a
natural landscaping, for wildlife programs,
then we're all the benefit of that. And, um... and
it's been successful. I've got a letter on my desk
today that came from the Hardy Toll Road. It went to
Mr. Mitchell, thanking him for our efforts in
establishing the wildfire from Hardy Toll Road.
The company, we also maintain and do work in the
Galveston area on some of our property as manager
of grounds maintenance. And he's big on getting
wildfire established in some of the developments
in the Galveston area also. Do you go to Colorado to
Snowmass? No, I haven't been up there. No, it's
just been in this area.
So that's been a major, obviously a major impetus.
Right. What other things are hanging out there? If
someone, you know, what I'm looking for,
obviously, or maybe it's not obvious, but in 20
years people are going to look back and say, boy,
that really made a difference when we did this or
when we did that or when this was allowed to happen
or that occurred. What sort of things are going on
and have gone on within the decade of the 80s and
presently that, you know, the business as usual
stuff, people are going to know about, but what
changes, what
initiatives
anything, I mean, business as usual has been so
successful, I really can't think of anything
really new and outstanding that we're doing. Or
have there been significant challenges to the
business as usual? That have, that have, you know,
where you've had to, you know, mount troops in
charge? Yeah. Um,
no, just the, um, the size of the jobs that we've had
to complete. And I think I see a little bit of, um, of
refinement. There's still that battle of
is it properly maintained from a first
impression, from a buyer's standpoint. I think
there's a little bit of more of a grooming
appearance, more of a little strip of grass along
the edge of the wood to give you that transition. So
you kind of lose that weedy look along the edge. I
think that's the trend. We're doing a little bit
more material. Economics have played into that
too, haven't they? One of the things Tim was
telling me was that
in the downturn times, 82, 83, 84, 86, through
there when things were rough, they were selling
300, 400 homes a year or something like that. Now
they're selling 900,000. And they're looking to
do that in good times. And that they're promoting
the notion that builders will finish out 600
homes, all within each other. And they want to do
that as a marketing plan.
Which means that instead of having homes built
serially, you'll have huge blocks, whole
neighborhoods done. Has that brought distinct
challenges, different challenges? I think just
in volume of work that we had to do, and the staff
increase. I mean, my staff has grown from, since
I've been here, from 30 and 35 to, I think we had like
80 at the peak period this year. And it fluctuates.
We have an average of 55, and this next year I might
have an average of 60. and just the keeping up with
the staff and the motivation and keeping the
equipment that you need and just actually getting
the job done. It's just such a, the area's growing.
Everything we have installed since 1974,
I still have to maintain that, plus everything new
that we're installing. So it's getting to be big.
It's just geometric increases, right? I think one
of the things that we're trying to do is to from a
landscape standpoint, are to not install so many
of those things that are high labor items. I mean,
there's a big issue in management about color or no
color. If we start installing hundreds of median
tips I have all over the Woodlands now, if I put
color in those areas, then my staff is going to
probably double just to do the the hand labor
that's involved in doing that. So, you know, we're
saying stay with native plants, minimum kind of
maintenance. What color are you talking about?
Annual? Annual color that you'd replace two or
three times a year based upon the season. And
that's kind of an ongoing battle right now. And I
think it's... Between whom?
Between... Those of us that are maybe too pure, the
naturalist versus the sales, the marketing
staff. They're doing it in 1960, so we should be
doing it out here. Some of us think, well, go to
1960. That's why we're unique is because we're
different. From little things that we are seeing,
we've picked out a beautiful red maple. okay when
it had extremely good color and about it and we
we're working with one of the growers and we're
growing our own calling the woodlands red maple
and we hope to proliferate the woodlands with our
our red maple and you know someday it may be
something you go to a nursery and buy you know those
little kind of things are going on but from an
overall standpoint we're we're looking into
techniques and ways to keep down the maintenance
costs so we can afford to keep doing all the
maintenance that we are now. Well, that makes
sense from a management point of view. The
marketers, though, I would imagine, you know, I
mean, I understand or I assume from what you said
that this battle, to use your words, is not over.
This discussion is ongoing. What if the marketing
group wins and, in fact, there is color in all the
tips of these things? What will that mean besides
just more work? I think it would mean more work. I
think it would be, I don't know what the total
outcome would be. You know, if that was all we did, I
think that we could live through that. My concern
would be that we'd get to the point someday, if you
let your guard down. I mean, to me, you've got to try
to save 100% of the trees on the block or the lot that
you're working with. or you won't get them. If you
try to save 100%, then you may get 50 or 60%. If you
loosen your requirements and you say, well, let's
strive for 50, you're going to get 25. And my real
concern would be if we ever relaxed our rules, our
demands on keeping the character of the forest,
that forest is like people, like old people, If you
just save the big trees, mature trees, you don't
save all of the, to me it's understory and the
shrubs, and we called it brush earlier, with the
beauty part of the forest, and it's also where
those child trees and the little trees are coming
along. If you ever get to the point where you say,
okay, let's mow that and make it look more like a
park as opposed to a living forest, then in time,
we're going to deplete the forest because old
trees are going to die, and there's not going to be
anything there to replace it and I think it would be
the most critical error that we could make if we got
to the point where we actually destroy the
character of our living forest that we have today.
So you obviously favor a conservative or a
conservationist point of view, let's conserve
what we have rather than muddy the water with new
introductions and new species. Absolutely,
absolutely. We might, I think you can have you can
possibly have both if you say okay it's okay we're
going to touch up the median tips and lightly but
you still got to be just as strong about the forest
itself I mean a median tip is in the middle of the
road so it's not a great reforestation zone or
regenerative area where you're you know you're
trying to keep the character of the forest but I
think once it starts on the if you're relax and it
starts on the median tips and the next thing it's
going to start is around the office building. I
want them to be able to see my signs. I want them to be
able to see my building. So we start, it's a
constant battle. We have it with every new
commercial building. We just had a McDonald's
that they said, you know, you can't have a
McDonald's if you can't see the sign for 10 miles
away. But it's not. It's not that way. It has a
low-profile sign, and you have to know where it is
to get there. And to everyone's surprise,
especially the owner, it's outperforming all the
other McDonald's in the area. So we have that kind
of debate going on. Are you going to have to,
whenever we get out on I-45, are you going to have to
be able to see the signs in the commercial part of
the woodlands? We're five miles in both
directions. Right now we're saying no. But
there's another side to that, too. If you know
where it is, you're going to come. Because I've
talked to individuals who said that from a
marketing point of view, and again, it's
marketers. They're the ones who are concerned
about image as much as you are, only from a
different point of view. One gentleman, I'm
trying to think who it was.
It may have been Richard Brown. Although I could be
wrong about that. But anyway, one gentleman I know
mentioned he says one of the mistakes he thinks was
made was that instead of having a wall of trees on
I-45, that in fact there should have been a peak
into a lake.
I think there will be. It just hasn't happened.
Yeah. But he says it should have happened from day
one. That there should have been something
intriguing from I-45 about the woodlands, rather
than this sort of closed... You know, because the
forest has two images. They're in constant
conflict. One is the nurturing trees, the
sheltering canopy, the privacy, the noise
abatement. The other is the forbidding woods. You
can't see the forest with trees. That's right.
That's where the bears live. That's where the
wolves live. You know what I'm saying? There's a
forbidding... for some claustrophobic concern
about it. And the notion was, well, hey, from I-45,
all you see is this wall. And it seems
impenetrable. And it seems,
or it can seem
daunting, perhaps. Maybe that's not the word. I
think you might get that sense now as you drive. by
the woodlands on I-45. We don't really see that
much going on. I think they have tried, we have
tried, we just haven't been able to develop that
commercial portion of the woodlands. The
population base hasn't been here to get them all
and those kind of things. But it's right on the
verge of happening. The next few years it's going
to explode along the entry to I-45. One of the
things you will see there someday will be our
impression of This is the woodlands, and you're
going to look through the trees or underneath the
trees and look into that lake that you're talking
about. It's going to be there, and I think it'll be
well done. The problem, as I see it, is not the view
of the lake. The reason you keep those trees out
there now and that wall is there is to give you an
option, again, to open up those little peaks so you
can see in and to hide those cars that are going to be
in front of the mall. And I think that's the
challenge. is how do we keep it from looking like
the other side of the street where all you see is
buildings and concrete and asphalt. That's what I
want it to look like. Still be enough of those
little contiguous pieces of forest even though
there's parking lots and cars and buildings and
service stations and all those kind of things are
going to be there. It still gives you the warmth of
the woods when you drive by there, that this is a
rule. What is your personal view on...
What do you call it? Well, take the recent issue
someone told me about yesterday. The brush is
getting out of hand. You can't see around the
corners when you come to a traffic intersection.
On one hand, philosophically, we want to create
the woodsy natural environment. On the other
hand, people who drive in the woodlands can be
intimidated, as was described to me, when they
can't see traffic coming. That can be a stressful
rather than a calming effect. Well, if the brush is
getting out of hand, I'm not doing my job. Safety
is something we've been aware of for a long time.
But it's a historical issue is what this guy was
telling me about. In the early days of the
woodlands, you probably, there were a lot of
hazardous intersections in the woodlands. But
since I've been in this position, my goal has been
that you'd be able to see at intersections. I mean,
we've gone in and we've underbrushed. Is that
written down? Are those kind of criteria codified
in some way? In the standards or what have you? Or is
that... probably too many too many of the
standards are floating around in my head or
someone is working for me that this is the way we do
things and it's not written down I think we're at
the point now we're getting large enough and yeah
that's probably one of our goals for this year is to
start actually getting in favor of what we're
doing so if it ever comes to the point where grounds
maintenance is too expensive or it's not going to
do this and we put it out to bid we need to qualify or
quantify what we're actually doing so that can
occur. But from a hazardous intersection
standpoint, if we know about them, we take care of
them immediately because it is going to be a
problem. Well, that's not what the issue I was
trying to raise. The issue I was trying to raise was
when compromise needs to be made, how is that
worked out? Who and how and what? That's what I was
trying to get at. Was it, you know, when... The old
philosophical issue of we want a natural
environment conflicts with other pressing,
realistic demands. And I just use that brush as an
example. I don't think anyone is going to downplay
the
involvement and the influence that George
Mitchell still has. over that issue. It's very
important to him that the woodlands be unique and
that it maintain the character of the forest. And
he will battle with anyone, you know. And he calls
me and says they don't want to save it, then tell
them to call me. Oh, he backs you that way? He backs
you 100% in what we're doing. So I know, and
management knows what he wants. So he's the
guiding force. I mean, I'm not just out on my own
doing what Bill Kendrick wants to do. I mean, Mr.
Mitchell is behind me 100%. So those decisions,
basically what you're saying, go all the way up the
line? Exactly. OK. OK. Let me ask you one other
question. Playing devil's advocate again. I'll
never use this, but it popped into my head and so I
wanted to ask. You're an agronomist. You'll know
more about this than I. In my little reading about
woods, trees, forests, they have a life of their
own. They cycle. And this argument has been in the
news significantly. The Yellowstone burning
last year in Annapolis is an object lesson in case,
in point, where In fact, environmentalists and
naturalists split over that issue because some
said, no, this is natural. Fires are a natural way
of renewing the forest and da, da, da, and what have
you.
But it's not an either-or proposition. It's
certainly not an either-or proposition here in
the woodlands. What you're doing is not
pure and simple, natural. you are promoting
certain species, right? Like wildflowers, like
other sorts of things, which in fact may not exist
natively in the woodlands. You're developing,
like the woodlands red maple that you talked
about. You're developing other, how does that, or
is that even an issue? Is there a purist can't, Is
there a more moderate camp? I would sense that Mr.
Mitchell is a bit more moderate in that. He has a
vision, and he's not particularly intrigued with
the purest, you know, the Sierra Club kind of...
Am I making myself clear? No, I think, if I'm
understanding the question, I think Mr.
Mitchell's comment to me is to... Don't plant
anything with native wildflowers. Don't use
anything with native trees as those that grow.
There's a wide number, probably, you know, 150 or
200 different species of trees that grow into
woodlands. We're constantly searching
nurseries all over trying to find native plant
material to purchase to use for landscape. To the
extent that a lot of people are not using them.
Therefore, there's not a high demand, there's not
a lot of growers. So some of the things that we want
to use, you literally can't find. Oh, there's more
than used to be. There's been several books
written. Yeah, a lot more than used to be. But my
question had to, you know, there is a, within the
environmentalist conservationist
discussion, or national forum, whatever you want
to call it, there are, as there are in any other
There are sort of right-wingers and
left-wingers, and I don't know which is which, but
what I'm saying is there are people who view
natural habitats as, in fact, an ecosystem unto
itself that
if a pine beetle comes in and eats all your beetles,
hey, that's what happens. That something else
naturally will replace it. That forests
themselves, that pines are not a climax forest.
True. You know, in fact, the climax, you know, the
stages of Forest of Others, I guess what I'm
talking about.
Is that an issue? Has that ever been an issue? Could
it be an issue? I haven't seen it as an issue. I think
the forest, like you said, is ever-changing, and
the first thing that happens is the pine.